Rating:	 	  	Reviews: 3 See Reviews
Rate/Review this Recipe
Active Time:  15 Minutes
Total Time:  15 Minutes
For this French-style potato salad, toss the warm potatoes with broth or wine so they absorb the flavor of the liquid. If you can get a delicious French garlic sausage, this would be a great place to use it.
RECIPE INGREDIENTS
For the Potatoes:
1 pound boiling potatoes (about 3), peeled, halved lengthwise, and cut crosswise into 1/4-inch slices
3 tablespoons canned low-sodium chicken broth or homemade stock
1/2 teaspoon salt
For the Dressing:
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard
1 1/2 teaspoons red wine vinegar or white wine vinegar
1/4 teaspoon fresh-ground black pepper
1/3 cup olive oil
For the Sausages:
1/2 pound smoked sausage, such as kielbasa (sausage) , quartered lengthwise and cut crosswise into 1/2-inch slices
2 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley

1 large head romaine lettuce, shredded (about 2 quarts)
 
 
You May Also Like
Breton Bacon, Sausage And Vegetable Stew See More Similar Recipes »
DIRECTIONS
FOR THE POTATOES:
Put the potatoes in a medium saucepan of salted water. Bring to a boil and cook until the potatoes are just tender, about 5 minutes. Drain the potatoes and put them in a glass or stainless-steel bowl. Add the chicken broth and 1/4 teaspoon of the salt to the warm potatoes and toss gently.


FOR THE DRESSING:
Meanwhile, in a large glass or stainless-steel bowl, whisk together the mustard, vinegar, the remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt, and the pepper. Add the oil slowly, whisking.


FOR THE SAUSAGES:
Put a large nonstick frying pan over moderate heat. Add the smoked sausage and cook, stirring occasionally, until the sausage is brown and warmed through, about 3 minutes. Remove the sausage and drain on paper towels.


TO SERVE:
Toss the potatoes with 2 tablespoons of the dressing and the parsley. Toss the romaine into the remaining dressing. Put the lettuce on plates and top with the potatoes and sausage.


WINE RECOMMENDATION:
The French often serve a simple and straightforward, fresh and fruity Beaujolais with smoked sausage and potato salad. Who are we to argue?
